Report on CRP Reading List Outline (draft)

1.Part 1:  Between Skepticism and Collaboration: The Humanities’ Encounter with AI Poetry and Creativity
1.1 Overview of humanities scholarship on AI-generated/assisted poetry 
1.1.1 Exploration of skepticism: studies on exploring deficiencies in AI-generated contents, studies on questions about authenticity, originality, and authorship
1.1.2 Recent shifts: growing interests in exploring positive effects in AI-assisted creativity and poetics. 
1.2 Role of AI as a tool for poetry co-creation 
1.2.1 Why AI-assisted poetry: Poetry as a starter of human-AI collaboration 
1.2.2 Why poetry need AI: AI as idea prompt, style-developer, diversity explorer, and mastery imitator. 
1.2.3 How to make AI a collaborator, not a replacement—supporting, prompting, inspiring
1.3 Human discernment and critical engagement during the process 
1.3.1 The irreducibility of certain human experiences and expressions: The untranslatable, the incommunable, context-dependent, and deeply private aspect of poetry expression. 
1.3.2 Emphasis on the continued need for human interventions in “adding layers” to machine learning—understanding nuances, contexts, emotion, and cultural resonance in AI poetry 
1.4 Advocacy for human-centred mindset collaboration and interaction with AI
Argument: AI should assist humans in understanding poetics, exposing users to diverse styles, and sharpening their ability to evaluate poetry
Highlight AI’s role as a supportive guide for non-experts and students, while emphasizing the subjectivity of human participants in the process of collaboration. 

Part 2: Establishing Efficient Poetry Generator: Machine Learning’s Practice in AI Poetry
2.1 Brief history of machine learning models for poetry 
2.1.1 Early rule-based, template-based systems 
2.1.2 Rise of neural networks and Large Language Models (LLM) 
2.1.3 Current capabilities and limitations of AI-generated poetry 
Achievements: fluency, structure, mimicry of established poetic forms
Persistent challenges: thematic depth, emotional resonance, contextual awareness
2.2 Integration of humanities insight into ML practice
2.2.1 Research on encoding poetic devices (metaphor, meter, rhyme)
2.2.2 Attempts to model meaningfulness and aesthetic value with human feedback loops— “adding layers” into the system. 
2.2.3 The necessity of human intervention: Why “good” poetry requires human curation, editing, and sometimes co-authorship. 
2.2.4 Why not machine evaluators? Ethics concerns and limitations of algorithmic evaluation.
2.3 Supporting creative poetry writing and poetics appreciation through AI
2.3.1 Evidence of AI boosting confidence in non-professional writers
2.3.2 AI enabling users to move from functional writing to creative writing

Part 3: AI Philosophy — From Turing, Licklider to Contemporary AI Ethics and Value Alignment (VA)
3.1 Turing Versus Licklider: Going full automatic or human-AI collaboration 
3.1.1 Evolution of philosophical debates around building a general artificial intelligence over the century
3.1.2 Development of Licklider’s vision: Establishing a future with Artificial Intelligence
3.2 Contemporary debates on AI ethics and AI value alignment (VA)
3.2.1 Contemporary concerns about AI: authorship, bias, misinformation, devaluation of artistic value. 
3.2.2 Questions of AI value alignment (VA): Whose values does AI encode? Who add values into machines? 
3.3 AI as a “mirror” for humanity: The veil of ignorance and estrangement effect in AI-generated contents 
3.3.1 How AI prompts us to reconsider what it means to exist, to create, to judge, and to evaluate. 
3.3.2 How AI catalyst for new questions in the humanities: What to discard, what to stay 
